In our overview about Bitcoin scripting language script,
we learned that it utilizes operation codes or opcodes for short.
Now there are actually 80 something different opcodes
available to us when we're writing scripts.
In this section, we'll learn more about how to use opcodes.
Remember that script is
a stack-based language and opcodes allow us to interact with data on that stack.
Some opcodes exists that either push or pop one or more parameters from that stack,
then act on them and then may push the result back onto the stack.
For example, there's OP_ADD and this is an ad opcodes.
Notice the opcodes are prefixed with OP.
So, OP_ADD will pop two items from the top of stack,
add them and then push the sum back onto the stack.
There are other opcodes that are conditional operators that evaluate
a condition and then produce a boolean result of either true or false.
For example, OP_EQUAL checks at the top two stack items are equal to each other.
Let's see an example script that uses these opcodes together.
Here, we have 2,6 OP_ADD eight and OP-EQUAL.
Remember, scripts execute from left to right.
Starting from the left,
the constant value two is pushed onto the top of the stack.
The script continues moving to the right.
The next constant value six is added on top of the stack on top of the value two.
Next is the opcode OP_ADD.
The operator ADD pops the top two items from the top of the stack.
Here, which are two and six,
adds them and then push the sum back onto the stack.
In this case, eight is returned back onto the stack.
Moving right, another constant value eight is push onto the stack.
The last step is OP_EQUAL,
which pops the top two items off the top of the stack.
In this case, eight and eight and then checks that they are equal and then
returns a boolean value of either true or false back onto the top of the stack.
In this case, it's going to be true.
This simple arithmetic example can actually be
a valid locking strip that can be used to lock a transaction output.
This portion of the scripts could be the locking script.
Six OP_ADD eight and OP_EQUAL and it could be
satisfied by transaction containing an input with the unlocking script two.
As we saw in the step-by-step example above when this script is
executed the result is true making the transaction valid.
This means the resulting UTX0 can be spent by
anyone with the skills to know that the number two satisfies the script.
This is a simplified case which will help familiarize you with script and opcodes.
Later on, we'll see scripts that make use of signatures and
public keys and these constants can be used in the unlocking script.
You'll also see new opcodes used in the locking script.
For example, there's OP_DUP which duplicates the top stack items and
this is a commonly used operation code and there's also OP_CHECKSIG,
which checks the signature for the top two stack items.
You can find a complete list of opcodes and
their descriptions in the Bitcoin Wiki which I've linked below.
Try out the following quiz and solve for
the unlocking script for the given locking script.
This will help you practice working with the execution flow and logic in scripts.